Adding the `dimension_slices` query parameter and associated metadata (#481)
Materials-Consortia/OPTiMaDe: optimade.rst

representation in all contexts. They are as follows:

- Basic types: **string**, **integer**, **float**, **boolean**, **timestamp**.
- **list**: a collection of items organized as nested ordered one-dimensional arrangements. All items are of the same type, unless unknown.
  A list can be empty, i.e., contain no items.

>   We note that the term "array" is often used in programming languages to refer to similar data structures.
>   However, the term "array" is avoided in this specification to prevent confusion with the meaning of the term "array" in the JSON specification.
> 
>   The term **list axes** refers to the levels of nesting of a list.
>   A list can have elements of different lengths along a given axis, i.e., the list does not need to be rectangular.
>   However, the dimensionality of a list, defined as the number of axes (i.e., the number of levels of nesting) MUST be the same for all entries of a given entry type.
>   Hence, each item in the list can be indexed by a number of indices equal to the dimensionality of the list.
> 
>   Valid examples:
> 
>     - ``[1.0, 2.0, 3.0]`` is a one-dimensional list of three floats (only one axis).
> 
>     - ``[]`` is a one-dimensional empty list.
> 
>     - ``[1.0, null, 3.0]`` is a one-dimensional list of floats. The ``null`` value is valid as it represents an unknown value.
> 
>     - ``[[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6]]`` is a two-dimensional list of three lists, each containing two integers. The first list axis has length 3 and the second list axis has length 2.
> 
>     - ``[[1, 2], [3, 4, 5], [6]]`` is a two-dimensional list of three lists, each containing a different number of integers, and each sublist has a different length.
> 
>     - ``[[1, 2], [null], [3]]`` and ``[[1, 2], [], [3]]`` are both valid two-dimensional lists, since all items can be indexed by two list indices.
> 
>   Invalid examples:
> 
>     - ``[3.0, "string"]`` is invalid since the two elements have different types.
> 
>     - ``[[1.0, 2.0], ["string", "string"]]`` is invalid since, while each of the two sublists is a valid list ([1.0, 2.0] is a list of floats, and ["string", "string"] is a list of strings), the two sublists have different types.
> 
>     - ``[[1.0, 2.0], [[3.0], [4.0]], [5.0]]`` is invalid since the second sublist contains nested lists, whereas the other two sublists do not, thus not allowing a consistent definition of the dimensions and axes of the list.
> 
>     - ``[[1, 2], null, [3]]`` is invalid since the second item is ``null`` and not a one-dimensional list.
>       Therefore, using two indices to address elements of the list is not always valid (i.e., if we call the list ``exmpl``, it is undefined what ``exmpl[1,2]`` represents).
>       We note however that there are situations where the OPTIMADE property definition could allow this datastructure to be valid (as a list of optional lists), even if this would not be a two-dimensional list for which dimensions and axes can be defined.
> 
> 
> - **dictionary**: a collection of **key**-**value** pairs, where **keys** are pre-determined strings, i.e., for the same entry property the **keys** remain the same among different entries whereas the **values** change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **list**: an ordered indexed collection of items that are either (i) all of the same basic type, (ii) only dictionaries, or (iii) only lists.
  In each case, (i)-(iii), unknown values (i.e., ``null``) are also allowed at any of the positions.
  Furthermore, a list can also be empty, i.e., contain no items.
  
  Multidimensional collections of items are represented as nested lists.
  This specification uses the term **list axes** to refer to the levels of nesting in nested lists, and **dimension** as the maximum number of axes represented via such nesting in a list and its sublists.
  A list can have elements of different lengths along a given axis, i.e., nested lists do **not** need to describe a rectangular arrangement of items.
  While this definition of the list type allows for complex structures of nested lists of varying depth, only those variants that can be expressed by OPTIMADE `Property definitions`_ are available for properties.

  Examples of valid lists:

    - ``[1.0, 2.0, 3.0]`` is a one-dimensional list of three floats (only one axis).

    - ``[]`` is a one-dimensional empty list.

    - ``[1.0, null, 3.0]`` is a one-dimensional list of floats. The ``null`` value is valid as it represents an unknown value.

    - ``[[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6]]`` is a two-dimensional list of three lists, each containing two integers. The first list axis has length 3 and the second list axis has length 2.

    - ``[[1, 2], [3, 4, 5], [6]]`` is a two-dimensional list of three lists, each containing a different number of integers, and each sublist has a different length.

    - ``[[1, 2], [null], [3]]`` and ``[[1, 2], [], [3]]`` are both valid two-dimensional lists, since all items can be indexed by two list indices.

    - ``[[1, 2], null, [3]]`` is valid since ``null`` can substitute items of any type, including sublists.

  Examples of invalid lists:

    - ``[3.0, "string"]`` is not a valid list, since the two elements have different types.
    
  Examples of lists that are valid, but cannot be used for properties in OPTIMADE due to limits imposed by OPTIMADE property definitions: 

    - ``[[1.0, 2.0], ["string", "string"]]``: while each of the two sublists is a valid list ([1.0, 2.0] is a list of floats, and ["string", "string"] is a list of strings), the two sublists have different types.

    - ``[[1.0, 2.0], [[3.0], [4.0]], [5.0]]``: the second sublist contains nested lists, whereas the other two sublists do not, thus not allowing a consistent definition of the dimensions and axes of the list.

- **dictionary**: a collection of **key**-**value** pairs, where **keys** are pre-determined strings, i.e., for the same entry property the **keys** remain the same among different entries whereas the **values** change.
```

    - ``[[1, 2], [3, 4], [5, 6]]`` is a two-dimensional list of three lists, each containing two integers. The first list axis has length 3 and the second list axis has length 2.

    - ``[[1, 2], [3, 4, 5], [6]]`` is a two-dimensional list of three lists, each containing a different number of integers, and each sublist has a different length.

    - ``[[1, 2], [null], [3]]`` and ``[[1, 2], [], [3]]`` are both valid two-dimensional lists, since all items can be indexed by two list indices.

    - ``[[1, 2], null, [3]]`` is valid since ``null`` can substitute items of any type, including sublists.

  Examples of invalid lists:

    - ``[3.0, "string"]`` is not a valid list, since the two elements have different types.
    
  Examples of lists that are valid, but cannot be used for properties in OPTIMADE due to limits imposed by OPTIMADE property definitions: 

    - ``[[1.0, 2.0], ["string", "string"]]``: while each of the two sublists is a valid list ([1.0, 2.0] is a list of floats, and ["string", "string"] is a list of strings), the two sublists cannot will not be able to be validated by the same item subschema in a Property definition.

>     - ``[[1.0, 2.0], [[3.0], [4.0]], [5.0]]``: the second sublist contains nested lists, whereas the other two sublists do not, thus not allowing a consistent definition of the dimensions and axes of the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - ``[[1.0, 2.0], [[3.0], [4.0]], [5.0]]``: the second sublist contains nested lists, whereas the other two sublists do not, thus not allowing a consistent definition of the dimensions and axes of the list.
      As of OPTIMADE v1.2, such lists are excluded by Property definitions.
```

- Basic types: **string**, **integer**, **float**, **boolean**, **timestamp**.
- **list**: an ordered collection of items, where all items are of the same type, unless they are unknown.
  A list can be empty, i.e., contain no items.
  Multidimensional collections of items are represented as nested lists.

>   The specification uses **array** as a more general term for structures of nested lists representing single or multidimensional data, and the term **array axes** for the levels of nesting.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to require that a multidimensional array, as opposed to just a list of lists, MUST always have the same size for all sublists at the same dimension? I.e. a matrix (2D array) can be square or rectangular, but can not be triangle or arbitrarily ragged?

>   Note that arrays are represented using lists and not as a separate data type.

Reviewer 2: In JSON? If we move to e.g. HDF5 then there the arrays will be a real distinct data type.

- Basic types: **string**, **integer**, **float**, **boolean**, **timestamp**.
- **list**: an ordered collection of items, where all items are of the same type, unless they are unknown.
  A list can be empty, i.e., contain no items.
  Multidimensional collections of items are represented as nested lists, and are still simply referred to as "lists" in this document.
  We note that the term "array" is often used in programming languages to refer to similar data structures.
  However, the term "array" is avoided in this specification to prevent confusion with the meaning of the term "array" in the JSON specification.

>   The term **list axes** refers to the levels of nesting.
>   We note that it is valid for a list to have elements of different lengths along a given axis, i.e., the list does not need to be rectangular.
>   However, the dimensionality of a list, defined as the number of axes (i.e., the number of levels of nesting) must be the same for all entries of a given entry type.

Reviewer: In reference to the 2:nd version of the change above, this is an improved suggestion:

```suggestion
  The term **list axes** refers to the levels of nesting of a list.
  A list can have elements of different lengths along a given axis, i.e., the list does not need to be rectangular.
  However, the dimensionality of a list, defined as the number of axes (i.e., the number of levels of nesting) must be the same for all entries of a given entry type.
  Hence, each item in the list can be indexed by a number of indices equal to the dimensionality of the list.
```

  Valid examples:

    - ``[1.0, 2.0, 3.0]`` is a one-dimensional list of three floats (only one axis).

    - ``[]`` is a one-dimensional empty list.

>     - ``[1.0, null, 3.0]`` is a one-dimensional list of floats. The ``null`` value is valid as it represents an unknown value.

Reviewer 2: An example that would be valid IMHO is:

```
[[1, 2], null, [3, 5]]

```

    - ``[[1, 2], [null], [3]]`` and ``[[1, 2], [], [3]]`` are both valid two-dimensional lists, since all items can be indexed by two list indices.

    - ``[[1, 2], null, [3]]`` is valid since ``null`` can substitute items of any type, including sublists.

  Examples of invalid lists:

    - ``[3.0, "string"]`` is not a valid list, since the two elements have different types.
    
  Examples of lists that are valid, but cannot be used for properties in OPTIMADE due to limits imposed by OPTIMADE property definitions: 

>     - ``[[1.0, 2.0], ["string", "string"]]``: while each of the two sublists is a valid list ([1.0, 2.0] is a list of floats, and ["string", "string"] is a list of strings), the two sublists cannot will not be able to be validated by the same item subschema in a Property definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - ``[[1.0, 2.0], ["string", "string"]]``: while each of the two sublists is a valid list ([1.0, 2.0] is a list of floats, and ["string", "string"] is a list of strings), the two sublists will not be able to be validated by the same item subschema in a Property definition.
```

    This means that the energy at index x(in the dimension labelled by this range_id) belongs to the cartesian_site_positions at the same index x.

  - :field:`indexable_dim`: List of Strings.
    The list of range_ids of the dimensions for which slicing is supported, i.e. the client can request a subrange in this dimension via the :query-param:`property_ranges` query parameter.

  - :field:`"layout"`: String.
    A string either equal to :val:`"dense"` or :val:`"sparse"` to indicate whether the property is returned in a dense or sparse layout.

  - :field:`data_range`: List of Slice Objects.
    This field describes how the values are distributed in the different dimensions.
    It consists of a slice object for each dimension of the property.
    The order of the slice objects must be the same as in the :field:`range_ids` field.
    If the :field:`layout` field is set to :val:`"sparse"` the value of the :field:`step` sub-field has no meaning.

  - :field:`nvalues`: Integer.
    The total number of values in the property.
    SHOULD be a queryable property with support for all mandatory filter features.

> Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format. It communicates that the property value has been omitted from the response and includes three different links for different partial data formats provided and metadata that makes it possible to only request only a part of the data for this property.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format.
It communicates that the property value has been omitted from the response and includes three different links for different partial data formats provided and metadata that makes it possible to request only a part of the data for this property.
```

         }
         // ...

> Transmission of large property values

Author: To clarify why I moved this section:

The section "Transmission of large property values" uses features from the section "Metadata properties". But the section "Metadata properties" does not depend on the section "Transmission of large property values" so I therefore placed the "Transmission of large property values" after the "Metadata properties" section.

I have made two small changes in the "Transmission of large property values" section:

Line 534 I replaced "one of alternative partial data formats " to  "one of the partial data formats". 
As I do not think the word alternative adds anything here.
Line 537: I broke the sentence into two parts and replaced "from the response, with three different links" with "from the response and includes three different links"

For example, the metadata property definition of the field :field:`_exmpl_example_field` MUST NOT define a metadata field named, e.g., :field:`accuracy`; the field rather needs to be named, e.g., :field:`_exmpl_accuracy`.
The reason for this limitation is to avoid name collisions with metadata fields defined by the OPTIMADE standard in the future that apply also to database-specific data fields.

> Implementation of the :field:`meta` field is OPTIONAL, unless the server implements slicing, in which case it is MANDATORY (see `Slices of array properties`_).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Implementation of the :field:`meta` field is OPTIONAL, unless the server implements slicing, in which case it is MANDATORY (see `Slices of list properties`_).
```

For example, the metadata property definition of the field :field:`_exmpl_example_field` MUST NOT define a metadata field named, e.g., :field:`accuracy`; the field rather needs to be named, e.g., :field:`_exmpl_accuracy`.
The reason for this limitation is to avoid name collisions with metadata fields defined by the OPTIMADE standard in the future that apply also to database-specific data fields.

> Implementation of the :field:`meta` field is OPTIONAL.

Reviewer 2: Revert the latest change.

Reviewer 5: Done

However, it becomes MANDATORY when some of subfields included in the :field:`meta` field are MANDATORY according to other parts of the OPTIMADE specification.
This happens, for instance, if a server supports slicing and receives a request containing the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter.
In this case, the inclusion of the :field:`requested_slices` subfield of the :field:`list_axes` field is MANDATORY, see `Slices of list properties`_.

When an implementation supports the :field:`property_metadata` field, it SHOULD include metadata fields for all properties which have metadata and are present in the data part of the response.

> If the client includes the string ``property_metadata`` in the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`, the server MUST include metadata fields for all properties which have metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the client includes the string ``property_metadata`` in the query parameter :query-param:`response_fields`, the server MUST include metadata fields for all properties which have metadata and are part of the response fields.
```

> Furthermore, if the server returns metadata for a property, it must be included in its entirety, i.e., including all non-null fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore, if the server returns metadata for a property, it MUST be included in its entirety, i.e., including all non-null fields.
```

     }
     // ...

> Slices of array properties

Reviewer: You are right, good catch. Array should almost everywhere be replaced by list. Array should only be kept when we explicitly refer to JSON:API output arrays.

> Slices of array properties

Reviewer: After thinking about this, I don't find a good way to handle this without defining the term 'array' to be a general word for a list or a structure of nested lists. (IMO "Multidimensional lists" is far worse as a term.) So, I've pushed a commit that does this.

> Slices of array properties

Reviewer 6: I'll leave it up to somebody more experienced in the protocol to resolve this.

The main mechanism is provided through the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices` defined in section `Single Entry URL Query Parameters`_.
Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).
When the client request includes the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices`, the server MUST provide metadata for all properties for which including the subfield :field:`requested_slice` of the :field:`array_axes` is MANDATORY (see below).
The field :field:`array_axes` is defined as follows:

- :field:`array_axes`: List of Dictionary.
  A list of dictionaries which provide information related to the axes of an array property, which is relevant for slicing.
  Each item, in order, represents the array axis as declared in the corresponding property definition.

  Each item MUST be a dictionary with the following REQUIRED fields:

  - :field:`dimension_name`: String.
    The dimension name of the corresponding array axis.

>   If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present, otherwise it MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:

Reviewer 3: It was not immediately clear to me whether the "it" refers to the `property_slices` parameter or to the `requested_slices` field (on a second read I assume the latter). I would suggest rewording this sentence.

>   If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present, otherwise it MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present, otherwise the key MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:
```

    For example, the number of frames, i.e., the length of the dimension named ``dim_frames``, is generally different for different trajectories.

  - :field:`sliceable`: Boolean.
    If :val:`true`, the server MUST handle slices for that dimension.
    If :val:`false`, the server MAY handle slices for that dimension, or MAY return the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented` when a client requests a slice involving this dimension.
    If the field is omitted or :val:`null`, it means the same thing as :val:`false`.

  - :field:`available_slice`: Dictionary or :val:`null`.
    This field describes a `slice object`_ where there MAY be non-null values in the data.
    By including this field, the server certifies that there are only :val:`null` values outside this slice.
    If not provided, or equal to :val:`null` or an empty dictionary, the client cannot make any assumptions about what part of the array contains :val:`null` values.

    Examples:

    - ``{"start": 3, "stop": 7, "step": 2}`` means the server certifies that values at indexes 0,1,2,4,6 and any index from 8 to the end of the array are :val:`null`.

> Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format for a request to the trajectory endpoint with the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices=dim_frames:3:37:5` and :query-param:`response_fields=cartesian_site_positions,_exmpl_temperature` where the trajectory consists of 432934 frames (with indexes 0 to 432933) and where the :field:`cartisian_site_positions` contains 7 sites. Furthermore, the :field:`_exmpl_temperature` contains only :val:`null` values except for items with indexes 1000, 1030, 1060, ..., 4000 (where the values can be either numeric or :val:`null`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format for a request to the trajectory endpoint with the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices=dim_frames:3:37:5` and :query-param:`response_fields=cartesian_site_positions,_exmpl_temperature` where the trajectory consists of 432934 frames (with indexes 0 to 432933) and where the :field:`cartesian_site_positions` contains 7 sites. Furthermore, the :field:`_exmpl_temperature` contains only :val:`null` values except for items with indexes 1000, 1030, 1060, ..., 4000 (where the values can be either numeric or :val:`null`).
```

> Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format for a request to the trajectory endpoint with the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices=dim_frames:3:37:5` and :query-param:`response_fields=cartesian_site_positions,_exmpl_temperature` where the trajectory consists of 432934 frames (with indexes 0 to 432933) and where the :field:`cartisian_site_positions` contains 7 sites. Furthermore, the :field:`_exmpl_temperature` contains only :val:`null` values except for items with indexes 1000, 1030, 1060, ..., 4000 (where the values can be either numeric or :val:`null`).

Reviewer: I've split the line and somewhat rephrased that last sentence. Please see if it is more clear now.

(What you read as a contradiction is intentional, but hopefully it is more clear now.)

.. code:: jsonc

     {
       // ...
       "data": {
         "type": "trajectories",
         "id": "2345678",
         "attributes": {
           "cartesian_site_positions": null,
           "_exmpl_temperature": null
         },
         "meta": {
           "property_metadata": {
             "cartesian_site_positions": {
               "array_axes": [
                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_frames",
                   "requested_slice": {
                     "start": 3,
                     "stop": 37,
                     "step": 5
                   },
                   "available_slice": {
                     "start": 0,
                     "stop": 432933,
                     "step": 1
                   },
                   "sliceable": true,

>                    "length": 432934,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                   "length": 432934
```

                 },
                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_sites",
                   "available_slice": {
                     "start": 0,
                     "stop": 6,
                     "step": 1
                   },
                   "sliceable": false,

>                    "length": 7,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                   "length": 7
```

                 },
                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_spatial",

>                    "length": 3,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                   "length": 3
```

                 }

>                ],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
               ]
```

             },
             "_exmpl_temperature": {
               "array_axes": [
                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_frames",
                   "requested_slice": {
                     "start": 3,
                     "stop": 37,
                     "step": 5
                   },
                   "available_slice": {
                     "start": 1000,
                     "stop": 4000,
                     "step": 30
                   },
                   "sliceable": true,

>                    "length": 432934,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                   "length": 432934
```

     }
     // ...

Slices of array properties
--------------------------

> The OPTIMADE standard defines a way for a client to request only a subset of the items of an array, referred to as a slice.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The OPTIMADE standard defines a way for a client to request only a subset of the items of a list, referred to as a slice.
```

The protocol for this functionality specifies how a server MAY support slicing arrays independently per entry, per array, and per array axis.
This functionality is separate from (but compatible with) the protocol described in `Transmission of large property values`_.
The protocol for large property values is used by the server implementation to transmit a set of items that it deems too large to provide inside the normal OPTIMADE response.
Slices, on the other hand, are used for a client to request a subset of any size of the items of an array, which can possibly (but not necessarily) result in such a large amount of values that the protocol for large property values is required to transmit them.

The main mechanism is provided through the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices` defined in section `Single Entry URL Query Parameters`_.
Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using the metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).

> When the client request includes the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices`, the server MUST provide metadata for all properties for which including the subfield :field:`requested_slice` of the :field:`array_axes` is MANDATORY (see below).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the client request includes the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices`, the server MUST provide metadata for all properties for which including the subfield :field:`requested_slice` of the :field:`list_axes` is MANDATORY (see below).
```

The field :field:`array_axes` is defined as follows:

> - :field:`array_axes`: List of Dictionary.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- :field:`list_axes`: List of Dictionary.
```

  A list of dictionaries which provide descriptive information related to the axes of an array property, including sliceable axes.
  Each item, in order, represents the array axis as declared in the corresponding property definition.

  Each item MUST be a dictionary with the following REQUIRED field:

  - :field:`dimension_name`: String.
    The dimension name of the corresponding array axis.

>   If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present. However, if that query parameter is not specified, the key MUST either be omitted or set equal to :val:`null`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the list axes of this list property the following key MUST be present. However, if that query parameter is not specified, the key MUST either be omitted or set equal to :val:`null`:
```

  The dictionary MAY contain the following fields:

  - :field:`length`: Integer.
    The length of this array axis which MUST be the same as the length of the declared dimension for this axis in the corresponding property definition.
    Note that the length of a dimension can be different for different entries if the length is not explicitly declared by the property definition.
    For example, the number of frames, i.e., the length of the dimension named ``dim_frames``, is generally different for different trajectories.

  - :field:`sliceable`: Boolean.
    If :val:`true`, the server MUST handle slices for that dimension.
    If :val:`false`, the server MAY handle slices for that dimension, or MAY return the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented` when a client requests a slice involving this dimension.
    If the field is omitted or :val:`null`, it means the same thing as :val:`false`.

  - :field:`available_slice`: Dictionary or :val:`null`.

>     This field describes a `slice object`_.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    This metadata field describes a `slice object`_.
```

    By including this field, the server certifies that there MUST only be :val:`null` values outside this slice.
    Inside the slice there MAY be any combination of null and non-null values.
    If not provided, or equal to :val:`null` or an empty dictionary, the client cannot make any assumptions about what part of the array contains :val:`null` values.

    Examples:

>     - ``{"start": 3, "stop": 7, "step": 2}`` means the server certifies that values at indexes 0, 1, 2, 4, 6 and any index from 8 to the end of the array are :val:`null`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - ``{"start": 3, "stop": 7, "step": 2}`` means the server certifies that values at indexes 0, 1, 2, 4, 6 and any index from 8 to the end of the list are :val:`null`.
```

> Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format for a request to the trajectory endpoint with the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices=dim_frames:3:37:5` and :query-param:`response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions,_exmpl_temperature` where the trajectory consists of 432934 frames (with indexes 0 to 432933) and where the :field:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` contains 7 sites.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Below follows an example of the :field:`data` and :field:`meta` parts of a response using the JSON response format for a request to the trajectory endpoint with the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices=dim_frames[3:37:5]` and :query-param:`response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions,_exmpl_temperature` where the trajectory consists of 432934 frames (with indexes 0 to 432933) and where the :field:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` contains 7 sites.
```

> Furthermore, the metadata subfield :field:`available_slice` in :field:`array_axes` in :field:`_exmpl_temperature` certifies that all values of the data field :field:`_exmpl_temperature` are :val:`null` except at indexes 1000, 1030, 1060, ..., 4000, where values can be either numeric or :val:`null`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the metadata subfield :field:`available_slice` in :field:`list_axes` in :field:`_exmpl_temperature` certifies that all values of the data field :field:`_exmpl_temperature` are :val:`null` except at indexes 1000, 1030, 1060, ..., 4000, where values can be either numeric or :val:`null`).
```

.. code:: jsonc

     {
       // ...
       "data": {
         "type": "trajectories",
         "id": "2345678",
         "attributes": {
           "frame_cartesian_site_positions": null,
           "_exmpl_temperature": null
         },
         "meta": {
           "property_metadata": {
             "frame_cartesian_site_positions": {

>                "array_axes": [

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
               "list_axes": [
```

                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_frames",
                   "requested_slice": {
                     "start": 3,
                     "stop": 37,
                     "step": 5
                   },
                   "available_slice": {
                     "start": 0,
                     "stop": 432933,
                     "step": 1
                   },
                   "sliceable": true,
                   "length": 432934
                 },
                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_sites",
                   "available_slice": {
                     "start": 0,
                     "stop": 6,
                     "step": 1
                   },
                   "sliceable": false,
                   "length": 7
                 },
                 {
                   "dimension_name": "dim_spatial",
                   "length": 3
                 }
               ]
             },
             "_exmpl_temperature": {

>                "array_axes": [

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
               "list_axes": [
```

     }
     // ...

Slices of array properties
--------------------------

> The OPTIMADE standard defines a way for a client to request only a subset of the items of an array, referred to as a slice.

Reviewer: This isn't something we do elsewhere in the standard so I don't think it belongs in this PR. However, please bring this up at the web meet, and if agreed it is a good general idea for when we define terms in the specification, I'd be happy to review a PR where someone does this consistently throughout the document.

> The protocol for this functionality allows the server to allow slicing independently per entry, per array, and per array axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol for this functionality specifies how a server MAY support slicing arrays independently per entry, per array, and per array axis.
```

> This functionality is separate from the protocol described in `Transmission of large property values`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This functionality is separate from (but compatible with) the protocol described in `Transmission of large property values`_.
```

> Slices are used for a client to ask the server to only provide a subset of items of an array, which can result in a small or large set of items.
> In contrast, the protocol for large property values is used by the server implementation to transmit a set of items that it deems too large to provide inside the normal OPTIMADE response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol for large property values is used by the server implementation to transmit a set of items that it deems too large to provide inside the normal OPTIMADE response.
Slices, on the other hand, are used for a client to request a subset of items of an array, which still may result in such a large amount of values that the protocol for large property values has to be used to transmit them.
```

> In contrast, the protocol for large property values is used by the server implementation to transmit a set of items that it deems too large to provide inside the normal OPTIMADE response.

Reviewer 6: I like this better, yes. Given that only _large_ has a meaning, it's better to remove small, as you did.
2 minor suggestions:
1. `The protocol for large property values`: can this refer to the relevant section?
2. If we decide on using some kind of highlighting (as brought up above), I'd mark _server_ and _client_. I think it's a good short-hand for navigating the protocol.

> In contrast, the protocol for large property values is used by the server implementation to transmit a set of items that it deems too large to provide inside the normal OPTIMADE response.

Reviewer: > The protocol for large property values: can this refer to the relevant section?

I realize that the way these comments chop up the text can make it a bit difficult to see the context, but the link you ask for is already right on the row before this line (numbered 616 right now).

The main mechanism is provided through the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices` defined in section `Single Entry URL Query Parameters`_.

> Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean here, can you use the GitHub suggest edit feature to show a suggestion? (Also, the discussion of terminology with regards to indices and axes may have been clarified by a discussion we had last web meet?)

> Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).

Reviewer 6: > (Also, the discussion of terminology with regards to indices and axes may have been clarified by a discussion we had last web meet?)

I'd need a refresher there, sorry.

> Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter. This MAY include the property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_) to list the numerical indices of axes that may be sliced.
```

> Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).

Reviewer: I'm confused, this doesn't read cleanly to me in the context it appears. The first sentence in the suggestion isn't even a complete sentence?

The context here is that we are in the general text at the top of the section trying to outline what this feature is and how it is used. The sentence right now is just trying to communicate that the metadata property array_axis is one of the essential mechanisms of the protocol.

> Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Information relating to the ability of the server to handle this query parameter and the relevant ranges of indexes is provided using the metadata property field :field:`array_axes` (see `Metadata properties`_).
```

When the client request includes the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices`, the server MUST provide metadata for all properties for which including the subfield :field:`requested_slice` of the :field:`array_axes` is MANDATORY (see below).
The field :field:`array_axes` is defined as follows:

- :field:`array_axes`: List of Dictionary.

>   A list of dictionaries which provide information related to the axes of an array property, which is relevant for slicing.

Reviewer: But the information about which axes are slice-able isn't the only information that these dictionaries provide? Maybe:

```suggestion
  A list of dictionaries which provide information related to the axes of an array property, which includes which of the axes are sliceable.
```

>   A list of dictionaries which provide information related to the axes of an array property, which is relevant for slicing.

Reviewer 6: Sure, if that's more appropriate. Would avoid the triply nested _which_, though:

```suggestion
A list of dictionaries which provide information related to the axes of an array property, including sliceable axes.
```

  Each item, in order, represents the array axis as declared in the corresponding property definition.

  Each item MUST be a dictionary with the following REQUIRED field:

  - :field:`dimension_name`: String.
    The dimension name of the corresponding array axis.

>   If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present, otherwise the key MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:

Reviewer: There is a bit of redundancy, but we want the lists  to be complete and self-contained in the sense of specifying what members are required or not, so I don't see an easy way to remove this minor redundancy.

>   If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present, otherwise the key MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:

Reviewer 6: Upon re-reading the paragraph above, it actually refers down. This is fine then.

>   If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the array axes of this array property the following key MUST be present, otherwise the key MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  If furthermore the request specifies any sliceable array axes, the following key MUST be present, otherwise the key MUST be omitted or equal to :val:`null`:
```

Reviewer 6: It's confusing that you start listing mandatory fields, only to break up the list specifying the same query.
I understand now that this covers a subcase. I think this phrasing communicates that idea better.

>   - :field:`requested_slice`: Dictionary.

Reviewer 6: So, these are very different modes of querying. Typically, a client will have to query them in separate stages.

1. I'd think it would be good to explicitely state this, either between this and specification above, or at the very beginning of the enumeration.
2. Fun edge case: which response should a server provide when both fields are used in a query? Kind of silly, but I could see clients make this mistake.

Reviewer 6: With 2 query modes, I meant:
1. requesting metadata about the schema (explicitly demanding metadata on sliceable properties). This section explains the responses format.
2. actually querying for data, sliced to the desired format.

Perhaps mode 1 could be split into 1.1 (sliceable metadata implicit requested) and 1.2 (sliceable metadata explicitly requested).

Anyhow, I was just asking for a clearer distinction between which query mode is covered where. Subtitles could work?
Maybe I highlighted the wrong lines, but that would underscore my point.

Lastly, my 2nd question was about the responses when a query asks for both schema metadata and regular data.

Reviewer 6: I think I found the source of my confusion, let me add a suggested modification

Reviewer 6: Puzzling the convo back together again, I originally understood some fields to define metadata of query capabitilies as well as data. Those would be 2 types of queries that should be connected serially. I remember also discussing this at the last workshop.

Upon a fresh re-read, I understand these to ALL be metadata. I am adding a few targeted review comments that emphasize this interpretation.

    A field that describes the requested slice that was provided via the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices`.
    The subfields MUST reflect the values provided via the :query-param:`property_slices`.

>     The implementation MUST preserve the values as given in the query parameter, including the distinction between specific values and default values even when they are equivalent.

Reviewer 6: This one was kinda though to get on the first read. Maybe refer to the example below.

    It MAY contain the following subfields that are defined according to the specification of a `slice object`_.

    - :field:`start`: Non-negative integer or :val:`null`.

    - :field:`stop`: Non-negative integer or :val:`null`.

    - :field:`step`: Positive integer or :val:`null`.

    A :val:`null` value for any of these fields means it has the default value defined for a `slice object`_.
    A missing value is equivalent to a :val:`null` value.
    (Consequently, the dictionary MAY be empty if all fields take the default values.)

    Examples:

    - For :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:::` some of the equivalent valid representations are:

      - ``{}``
      - ``{"start": null, "stop": null, "step": null}``
      - ``{"start": null}``
      - ``{"stop": null, "step": null}``

      Whereas, e.g., the following representation is not valid:

      - ``{"start": 0}`` (despite that :val:`0` is the default value of the :field:`start` field.)

>         But it is instead a valid representation if the query parameter was :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:0::`.

Reviewer 6: I think this would be clearer when presented as 2 bulletpoints in the format _query: response_.

Reviewer: I think we need a suggested edit here to understand the format you are after.

Reviewer 6: Done

>     Examples:
> 
>     - For :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:::` some of the equivalent valid representations are:
> 
>       - ``{}``
>       - ``{"start": null, "stop": null, "step": null}``
>       - ``{"start": null}``
>       - ``{"stop": null, "step": null}``
> 
>       Whereas, e.g., the following representation is not valid:
> 
>       - ``{"start": 0}`` (despite that :val:`0` is the default value of the :field:`start` field.)
>         But it is instead a valid representation if the query parameter was :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:0::`.
> 
>     - :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:3:5:2` the representation MUST be:
> 
>       - ``{"start": 3, "stop": 5, "step": 2}``

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    Examples:
    Query Type | Query Formulation | Valid Representations
    ----------------|---------------------------|------------------------------
    fully formed | :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:3:5:2` | ``{"start": 3, "stop": 5, "step": 2}``
    empty query with start | :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:0::` | ``{"start": 0}``
    empty query | :query-string:`property_slices=dim_frames:::` | ``{}``
                         |                                                                         | ``{"start": null, "stop": null, "step": null}``
                         |                                                                         | ``{"start": null}``
                         |                                                                         | ``{"stop": null, "step": null}``

   Note that any of the representations for the "empty query" are valid.
   Even though, semantically, it means the same as the "empty query with start" at index zero, both differ in representation.
```

Reviewer 6: I went with a tabular lay-out, but if this is too unconventional, I can split it by paragraphs.
Note that I swapped the order, introducing the empty query after the one with the explicit starting index.

  The dictionary MAY contain the following fields:

  - :field:`length`: Integer.
    The length of this array axis which MUST be the same as the length of the declared dimension for this axis in the corresponding property definition.
    Note that the length of a dimension can be different for different entries if the length is not explicitly declared by the property definition.
    For example, the number of frames, i.e., the length of the dimension named ``dim_frames``, is generally different for different trajectories.

  - :field:`sliceable`: Boolean.
    If :val:`true`, the server MUST handle slices for that dimension.
    If :val:`false`, the server MAY handle slices for that dimension, or MAY return the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented` when a client requests a slice involving this dimension.
    If the field is omitted or :val:`null`, it means the same thing as :val:`false`.

  - :field:`available_slice`: Dictionary or :val:`null`.
    This field describes a `slice object`_ where there MAY be non-null values in the data.

>     By including this field, the server certifies that there are only :val:`null` values outside this slice.

Reviewer 6: > the server certifies that [...]

Can I interpret this as a MUST? If so, I would put the stronger specifier before the weaker MAY.

>     This field describes a `slice object`_ where there MAY be non-null values in the data.
>     By including this field, the server certifies that there are only :val:`null` values outside this slice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This field describes a `slice object`_.
    By including this field, the server certifies that there MUST only be :val:`null` values outside this slice.
    Inside the slice there MAY be any combination of null and non-null values.
```

    +------------------+----------------------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------+

    Note that any of the representations displayed above for the "empty query" are valid.
    Semantically, the two examples above "empty query" and the "empty query with start" are equivalent, but differ in representation.
    This is due to the starting index being explicitly specified in the "empty query with start" example.
    The need for this difference becomes apparent if the starting index takes on a value different from the default.

  The dictionary MAY contain the following fields:

  - :field:`length`: Integer.
    The length of this list axis which MUST be the same as the length of the declared dimension for this axis in the corresponding property definition.
    Note that the length of a dimension can be different for different entries if the length is not explicitly declared by the property definition.
    For example, the number of frames, i.e., the length of the dimension named ``dim_frames``, is generally different for different trajectories.

>   - :field:`sliceable`: Boolean.
>     If :val:`true`, the server MUST handle slices for that dimension.
>     If :val:`false`, the server MAY handle slices for that dimension, or MAY return the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented` when a client requests a slice involving this dimension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - :field:`sliceable`: Boolean.
    If :val:`true`, the server MUST handle slices for that dimension.
    If :val:`false`, the server MAY handle slices for that dimension, but if it receives a slice request it cannot handle, it MUST return the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented` when a client requests a slice involving this dimension.    
    If a server is capable of handling slicing for a particular dimension, the server SHOULD indicate this by setting :field:`sliceable` to :val:`true` in its responses.
```

     }
     // ...

Slices of list properties
-------------------------

The OPTIMADE standard defines a way for a client to request only a subset of the items of a list, referred to as a slice.
The protocol for this functionality specifies how a server MAY support slicing lists independently per list axis.
This functionality is separate from (but compatible with) the protocol described in `Transmission of large property values`_.
The protocol for large property values is used by the server implementation to transmit a set of items that it deems too large to provide inside the normal OPTIMADE response.
Slices, on the other hand, are used for a client to request a subset of any size of the items of a list, which can possibly (but not necessarily) result in such a large amount of values that the protocol for large property values is required to transmit them.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add client implementation note (reference section Metadata properties): to discover which properties have sliceable dimensions (and more generally the dimension names etc.), the client should add `property_metadata` in the `response_fields` query parameter together with the names of the fields we are interested to.

The field :field:`list_axes` is defined as follows:

- :field:`list_axes`: List of Dictionary.
  A list of dictionaries which provide descriptive information related to the axes of a list property, including sliceable axes.
  Each item, in order, represents the list axis as declared in the corresponding property definition.

  Each item MUST be a dictionary with the following REQUIRED field:

  - :field:`dimension_name`: String.
    The dimension name of the corresponding list axis.

  If the request specifies the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for any of the list axes of this list property the following key MUST be present. However, if that query parameter is not specified, the key MUST either be omitted or set equal to :val:`null`:

  - :field:`requested_slice`: Dictionary.
    A metadata field that describes the requested slice that was provided via the query parameter :query-param:`property_slices`.
    The subfields MUST reflect the values provided via the :query-param:`property_slices`.

>     In particular, the field is MANDATORY if the client request includes the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter for this list axis.

Reviewer 5: done

  The slice is defined in a similar manner as the `slice object`_.
  If no value is placed between the colons for a component of the slice then the default value is used.

  The first integer specifies the start of the slice, i.e. the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned.
  The default is the index of the first value.
  The second integer specifies the end/stop of the slice, i.e. the last index for which values should be returned.
  The default is the index of the last value of the property.
  The third integer specifies the step size in that dimension.
  The default is :val:`1`

  Multidimensional slices can be defined by specifying a range for each dimension.
  These ranges are separated by a comma (",", ASCII 44(0x2C)).
  The slices are 0-based, i.e. the first value has index 0, and inclusive i.e. for the range :val:`:10:20:1` the last value returned belongs to index 20.

  General support for :field:`property_ranges` is OPTIONAL, however particular property definitions may themselves deviate from this and place stricter requirements on implementations.

>   Databases MUST use these ranges for properties where the dimension is listed under :field:`indexable_dimensions`, if this is not the case, the database MAY return more data than was specified in the range.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Databases MUST use these ranges for properties where the dimension is listed under :field:`indexable_dim`, if this is not the case, the database MAY return more data than was specified in the range.
```

  If a dimension is not specified, it is assumed that the whole range in that dimension is requested.
  If one or more values are not present at one of the requested combination of indexes, the server MAY either decide to return null or if possible adjust the returned range so the indexes for which no value is defined are no longer part of the range.
  The latter is only allowed when no defined values would be lost.

>   For dense arrays that may mean that the field :field:`returned_range` differs from the requested range.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  For dense arrays that may mean that the field :field:`returned_ranges` differs from the requested range.
```

Reviewer 3: I assume the `returned_ranges` is meant here as `returned_range` does not seem to be currently defined.

  The property to which this sub-range should be applied can be specified via the :query-param:`response_fields` query parameter.
  Each slice consists of the name of a dimension directly followed by the requested slice in this dimension.
  The dimension name and the start, stop and step values of the slice are separated by colons (":", ASCII 58(0x3A))
  The slice is defined in a similar manner as the `slice object`_.
  If no value is placed between the colons for a component of the slice then the default value is used.

  The first integer specifies the start of the slice, i.e. the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned.
  The default is the index of the first value.
  The second integer specifies the end/stop of the slice, i.e. the last index for which values should be returned.
  The default is the index of the last value of the property.
  The third integer specifies the step size in that dimension.
  The default is :val:`1`

  Multidimensional slices can be defined by specifying a range for each dimension.
  These ranges are separated by a comma (",", ASCII 44(0x2C)).

>   The slices are 0-based, i.e. the first value has index 0, and inclusive i.e. for the range :val:`:10:20:1` the last value returned belongs to index 20.

Reviewer 7: Shouldn't this be `dim:10:20:1`? I suggest explicitly naming the example dimension for clarity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The slices are 0-based, i.e. the first value has index 0, and inclusive i.e. for the dimension :val:`dim` the range :val:`dim:10:20:1` the last value returned belongs to index 20.
```

  General support for :field:`property_ranges` is OPTIONAL, however particular property definitions may themselves deviate from this and place stricter requirements on implementations.
  Databases MUST use these ranges for properties where the dimension is listed under :field:`indexable_dim`, if this is not the case, the database MAY return more data than was specified in the range.

  If a dimension is not specified, it is assumed that the whole range in that dimension is requested.

>   If one or more values are not present at one of the requested combination of indexes, the server MAY either decide to return null or if possible adjust the returned range so the indexes for which no value is defined are no longer part of the range.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  If one or more values are not present at one of the requested combination of indexes, the server MAY either decide to return :val:`null` or if possible adjust the returned range so the indexes for which no value is defined are no longer part of the range.
```

>   The latter is only allowed when no defined values would be lost.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  The latter is only allowed when no defined values would be omitted.
```
Maybe "omitted" fits here better than "lost"?

One additional query parameter :query-param:`property_slices` MUST be handled by the API implementation either as defined below or by returning the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented`:

- **property\_slices**: A number of slice specifications to request only parts of array properties for the functionality described in `Slices of array properties`_.

  The query parameter contains a comma-separated (",", ASCII 44(0x2C)) list of slice specifications.
  Each slice specification consists of an ordered sequence of four elements separated by the colon character (":", ASCII 58(0x3A)).
  The elements in the sequence are the dimension name and the three components of the slice, i.e., the start, stop, and step values defined in the same way as for a `slice object`_.
  Omitting the value for any of the components of the slice specifies a default value (however, all the colon separators MUST be included).
  The start value specifies the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned (which is 0-based and inclusive).
  The default is :val:`0`.
  The stop value specifies the last index for which values should be returned (inclusive).

>   The default is the last index of the array along the specified dimension.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  The default is :val:`null`, which represents the last index of the array along the specified dimension.
```

Reviewer 6: It's actually already explaiend that `:val:null` refers to the default value, and that it should be returned unless a specified value was used.
From how I understood it, the same applies to the `start` and `step` keys too.

  The step value specifies the step size in that dimension.
  The default is :val:`1`.

  An empty value of the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter MUST be interpreted as equivalent to the query parameter not being included in the request.

  Requirements and conventions for the response when this query parameter is used are described in `Slices of array properties`_.

  Example:

  - :query-url:`http://optimade.example.com/v1/trajectories/id_12345?response_fields=cartesian_site_positions&property_ranges=dim_frames::999:10,dim_sites:30:70:`

>     This query URL requests items from the array :field:`cartesian_site_positions` only for the 31st to 71st sites (i.e., with indexes 30 through 70 inclusive) for 1 out of every 10 frames of the first 1000 frames (i.e., taking steps of 10 over indexes 0 through 999 inclusive, which requests the frames with index 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 990) of a trajectory with ID :val:`id_12345`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This query URL requests items from the array :field:`cartesian_site_positions` only for the 31st to 71st sites (i.e., with indexes 30 through 70 inclusive) for 1 out of every 10 frames of the first 1000 frames (i.e., taking steps of 10 over indexes 0 through 999 inclusive, which requests the frames with indexes 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 990) of a trajectory with ID :val:`id_12345`.
```

  The slice is given as an ordered sequence of three components separated by the colon character (":", ASCII symbol 58 dec).
  The elements in the sequence are the start, stop, and step values defined in the same way as for a `slice object`_.
  Omitting the value for any of the components of the slice specifies a default value (however, all the colon separators MUST be included).
  The start value specifies the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned (which is 0-based and inclusive).
  The default is :val:`0`.
  The stop value specifies the last index for which values should be returned (inclusive).
  The default is :val:`null`, which represents the last index of the array along the specified dimension.
  The step value specifies the step size in that dimension.
  The default is :val:`1`.

  An empty value of the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter MUST be interpreted as equivalent to the query parameter not being included in the request.
As a consequence, the server will not slice any properties. 

  Requirements and conventions for the response when this query parameter is used are described in `Slices of array properties`_.

  Example:

>   - :query-url:`http://optimade.example.com/v1/trajectories/id_12345?response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions&property_ranges=dim_frames::999:10,dim_sites:30:70:`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - :query-url:`http://optimade.example.com/v1/trajectories/id_12345?response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions&property_slices=dim_frames::999:10,dim_sites:30:70:`
```

- **property\_slices**: A number of slice specifications to request only parts of array properties for the functionality described in `Slices of array properties`_.

  The query parameter contains a comma-separated (",", ASCII symbol 44 dec) list of slice specifications.
  Each slice specification consists of a dimension name followed by the left square bracket character ("[", ASCII symbol 91 dec), a slice, and the right square bracket character ("]", ASCII symbol 93 dec).
  The slice is given as an ordered sequence of three components separated by the colon character (":", ASCII symbol 58 dec).
  The elements in the sequence are the start, stop, and step values defined in the same way as for a `slice object`_.
  Omitting the value for any of the components of the slice specifies a default value (however, all the colon separators MUST be included).
  The start value specifies the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned (which is 0-based and inclusive).
  The default is :val:`0`.
  The stop value specifies the last index for which values should be returned (inclusive).

>   The default is :val:`null`, which represents the last index of the array along the specified dimension.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  The default is :val:`null`, which represents the last index of the list along the specified dimension.
```

The URL query parameter :query-param:`include` is OPTIONAL for both clients and API implementations.
The meaning of these URL query parameters are as defined above in section `Entry Listing URL Query Parameters`_.

> One additional query parameter :query-param:`property_slices` MUST be handled by the API implementation either as defined below or by returning the error :http-error:`501 Not Implemented`:

Reviewer 6: I get the impression from the `develop` branch that the use of HTTP errors is new in this PR.
While in-line with many standards, it'll increase the burden of response handling on the client's side.

Probably, HTTP errors merrit their own section. Questions that come to mind include for example:
Is there any specication about the message body? Is the server obliged to specify why it returned the 501?

Reviewer: No?... Specific HTTP errors are mentioned at least as far back as 1.0. So, I don't think this discussion belongs in this PR, but can be posted as an issue and possibly in the future a general cleanup of the references to HTTP errors.

> - **property\_slices**: A number of slice specifications to request only parts of array properties for the functionality described in `Slices of array properties`_.

Reviewer 6: May the client request multiple (different) slices from the same array axis in the same query?
E.g. ```property_slices=[dim_frames:3:37:5,dim_frames:49:105:2]```

Reviewer 6: This is clarified in "REQUIRED keys". A link suffices then.

Reviewer: In the present version (which may have changed since you commented) I think this information is quite clear in the text right below.

Reviewer 6: Yes, I guess the question just popped up for me while reading this, while the response is much more below. But this is a minor point.

>   The query parameter contains a comma-separated (",", ASCII 44(0x2C)) list of slice specifications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  The query parameter contains a comma-separated (",", ASCII symbol 44 dec, 0x2C hex) list of slice specifications.
```

>   Each slice specification consists of an ordered sequence of four elements separated by the colon character (":", ASCII 58(0x3A)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Each slice specification consists of an ordered sequence of four elements separated by the colon character (":", ASCII symbol 58 dec, 0x3A hex).
```

  The elements in the sequence are the dimension name and the three components of the slice, i.e., the start, stop, and step values defined in the same way as for a `slice object`_.
  Omitting the value for any of the components of the slice specifies a default value (however, all the colon separators MUST be included).
  The start value specifies the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned (which is 0-based and inclusive).
  The default is :val:`0`.
  The stop value specifies the last index for which values should be returned (inclusive).

>   The default is the last index of the array along the specified dimension.

Reviewer 6: Are inverse indices, e.g. -1 for last, -2 for penultimate, also supported?

Reviewer: Since they are not defined, no. They could be supported in the future.

  The step value specifies the step size in that dimension.
  The default is :val:`1`.

>   An empty value of the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter MUST be interpreted as equivalent to the query parameter not being included in the request.

Reviewer 6: Is this then equivalent to `property_ranges=[<first_dim>:::, ...]`?
I.e. should this return the full property or leave it out?

This might be defined somewhere else. If so, pls refer to that section.

Reviewer: The query parameter not being included means the client isn't trying to use this protocol; so I think the natural interpretation is that "everything works as usual without the slices protocol". I guess that could be clarified somewhere, but I'm not sure exactly where.

  Requirements and conventions for the response when this query parameter is used are described in `Slices of array properties`_.

  Example:

  - :query-url:`http://optimade.example.com/v1/trajectories/id_12345?response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions&property_ranges=dim_frames::999:10,dim_sites:30:70:`

>     This query URL requests items from the array :field:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` only for the 31st to 71st sites (i.e., with indexes 30 through 70 inclusive) for 1 out of every 10 frames of the first 1000 frames (i.e., taking steps of 10 over indexes 0 through 999 inclusive, which requests the frames with indexes 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 990) of a trajectory with ID :val:`id_12345`.

Reviewer 6: Minor style changes to make the phrase clearer:

1. Split the phrase up by both attributes.
2. Align the order of the example with the explanation, i.e. concerning `dim_frames` and `dim_sites`.
3. Just reiterate the 0-indexing convention after "the 31st to 71st sites". Apart from that, it's a great refresher.
4. `the frames with indexes 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 990` explains it enough. The paranteses else become too verbose.

  The slice is given as an ordered sequence of three components separated by the colon character (":", ASCII symbol 58 dec).
  The elements in the sequence are the start, stop, and step values defined in the same way as for a `slice object`_.
  Omitting the value for any of the components of the slice specifies a default value (however, all the colon separators MUST be included).
  The start value specifies the first index in that dimension for which values should be returned (which is 0-based and inclusive).
  The default is :val:`0`.
  The stop value specifies the last index for which values should be returned (inclusive).
  The default is the last index of the array along the specified dimension.
  The step value specifies the step size in that dimension.
  The default is :val:`1`.

  An empty value of the :query-param:`property_slices` query parameter MUST be interpreted as equivalent to the query parameter not being included in the request.

  Requirements and conventions for the response when this query parameter is used are described in `Slices of array properties`_.

  Example:

>   - :query-url:`http://optimade.example.com/v1/trajectories/id_12345?response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions&property_ranges=dim_frames::999:10,dim_sites:30:70:`
> 
>     This query URL requests items from the array :field:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` only for the 31st to 71st sites (i.e., with indexes 30 through 70 inclusive) for 1 out of every 10 frames of the first 1000 frames (i.e., taking steps of 10 over indexes 0 through 999 inclusive, which requests the frames with indexes 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 990) of a trajectory with ID :val:`id_12345`.

Reviewer: I think this addresses @ndaelman-hu suggestions, except for removing the explanation in the last parenthesis, which from our discussions on the workshop I do think still is necessary to be completely clear. 

```suggestion
  - :query-url:`http://optimade.example.com/v1/trajectories/id_12345?response_fields=frame_cartesian_site_positions&property_ranges=dim_sites:30:70:,dim_frames::999:10`

    This query URL requests items from the trajectory with ID :val:`id_12345`.
    It requests items from the array :field:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` for this trajectory.
    The items that are requested are for only the 31st to 71st sites (i.e., with indexes 30 through 70 inclusive) for 1 out of every 10 frames of the first 1000 frames (i.e., taking steps of 10 over indexes 0 through 999 inclusive, which requests the frames with indexes 0, 10, 20, 30, ..., 990).
```

Reviewer 6: It's good like this, including the parentheses.

    - :val:`partial`: the defined property MUST be queryable with support for a subset of the filter language operators as specified by the field :field:`query-support-operators`.
    - :val:`none`: the defined property does not need to be queryable with any features of the filter language.

  - :field:`property_range`: Dictionary.
    A dictionary that contains information needed to use the :query-param:`property_range` query parameter

    - :field:`supported`: Boolean.
      This field indicates whether the it is possible to use the :query-param:`property_range` query parameter in combination with this field. If true the use of the :query-param:`property_range` is supported

    - :field:`range_ids`: List of Strings.
      A list with an identifier for each dimension of the property.
      The outermost dimension of a nested array should come first.
      If, within one entry, dimensions for two or more properties share the same :field:`range_id` those dimensions should be thought of as the same dimension.
      For example, if both the :property:`energy` and :property:`cartesian_site_positions` of a molecular dynamics trajectory share a range_id of :val:`frames`.

>       This means that the energy at index x(in the dimension labelled by this range_id) belongs to the cartesian_site_positions at the same index x.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      This means that the energy at index *x* (in the dimension labelled by this `range_id`) belongs to the `cartesian_site_positions` at the same index *x*.
```

> 
>     - :field:`range_ids`: List of Strings.
>       A list with an identifier for each dimension of the property.
>       The outermost dimension of a nested array should come first.
>       If, within one entry, dimensions for two or more properties share the same :field:`range_id` those dimensions should be thought of as the same dimension.
>       For example, if both the :property:`energy` and :property:`cartesian_site_positions` of a molecular dynamics trajectory share a range_id of :val:`frames`.
>       This means that the energy at index x(in the dimension labelled by this range_id) belongs to the cartesian_site_positions at the same index x.

Reviewer: This is duplicated with the property definition PR #445, note that there the names are called "dimension names"
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This was fixed in https://github.com/Materials-Consortia/OPTIMADE/pull/481/commits/f2a27996c2e6eb59258385f5716265a9e78624c4

    - :val:`partial`: the defined property MUST be queryable with support for a subset of the filter language operators as specified by the field :field:`query-support-operators`.
    - :val:`none`: the defined property does not need to be queryable with any features of the filter language.

  - :field:`property_range`: Dictionary.
    A dictionary that contains information needed to use the :query-param:`property_range` query parameter.

    - :field:`supported`: Boolean.
      This field indicates whether it is possible to use the :query-param:`property_range` query parameter in combination with this field. 

    - :field:`range_ids`: List of Strings.
      A list with an identifier for each dimension of the property.

>       The outermost dimension of a nested array should come first.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
      The outermost dimension of a nested array MUST come first.
```
I think making this a MUST would make it easier to use both for client and server.

Reviewer: This is outdated: it was handed in the property definitions PR (that used a completely different formulation that means the same thing).

>       If, within one entry, dimensions for two or more properties share the same :field:`range_id` those dimensions should be thought of as the same dimension.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
      If, within one entry, dimensions for two or more properties share the same :field:`range_id` those dimensions should be treated as the same dimension.
```

Reviewer: Outdated: right now the text already says "represents the same dimension".

>       For example, if both the :property:`energy` and :property:`cartesian_site_positions` of a molecular dynamics trajectory share a range_id of :val:`frames`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
      For example, both the :property:`energy` and :property:`cartesian_site_positions` of a molecular dynamics trajectory may share a range_id of :val:`frames`.
```

Reviewer: Outdated: this must have been edited after this suggestion, since the sentence now continues "this means ..." which doesn't make it easy to apply this suggestion. On the other hand, we probably will edit this anyway.

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`names`: List of Strings.
    A list of names of the dimensions of the underlying one or multi-dimensionsional data represented as multiple levels of lists.
    The order is such that the first name applies to the outermost list, the next name to the lists embedded in that list, etc.
    Dimension names defined by the OPTIMADE standard are prefixed by ``dim_``.

>     Dimension names defined by database or definition providers MUST be prefixed by the corresponding database or namespace prefix, and SHOULD also be prefixed with ``dim_``, e.g., ``_exmpl_dim_particles``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Dimension names defined by database or definition providers MUST be prefixed by the corresponding database or namespace prefix, and SHOULD also be prefixed by ``dim_``, e.g., ``_exmpl_dim_particles``.
```

    If, within one entry, two or more array axes in one or more properties share the same dimension :field:`name`, those represent the same dimension.

>     For example, let us consider the property :property:`cartesian_site_positions` of the trajectory entry, where the first dimension name is :val:`dim_frames`.

Reviewer: Right, but, this refers to the `trajectory` entry type, and it was decided as we were writing this PR up that it was OK to use trajectory examples even though that endpoint isn't in the specification yet. 

However, you have an excellent point in that we shouldn't name the field in trajectories, which also has an extent in `dim_frames`, exactly the same name as the field in structures, which does not have that.

@giovannipizzi, @gmrigna, @sauliusg What should the list of `cartesian_site_coordinates` be named? Maybe: `frame_cartesian_site_coordinates`?

>     For example, let us consider the property :property:`cartesian_site_positions` of the trajectory entry, where the first dimension name is :val:`dim_frames`.

Reviewer: I've fixed this by renaming the field in the examples to `frame_cartesian_site_positions`.

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`names`: List of Strings.
    A list of names of the dimensions of the underlying one or multi-dimensionsional data represented as multiple levels of lists.
    The order is such that the first name applies to the outermost list, the next name to the lists embedded in that list, etc.
    Dimension names defined by the OPTIMADE standard are prefixed by ``dim_``.

>     Dimension names defined by database or definition providers MUST be prefixed by the corresponding database or namespace prefix, and SHOULD also be prefixed by ``dim_``, e.g., ``_exmpl_dim_particles``.

Reviewer 6: > SHOULD also be prefixed by ``dim_``

Would that still be a prefix? Maybe, "extended by the `dim_` qualifier"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Dimension names defined by database or definition providers MUST be prefixed by the corresponding database or namespace prefix, which SHOULD then be immediately followed by ``dim_``, e.g., ``_exmpl_dim_particles``.
```

    If, within one entry, two or more array axes in one or more properties share the same dimension :field:`name`, those represent the same dimension.
    For example, let us consider the property :property:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` of the trajectory entry, where the first dimension name is :val:`dim_frames`.

>     If there is another one-dimensional (i.e., with a single axis) array property :property:`_exmpl_energy` of the same trajectory entry that specifies in its property definition the same dimension name :val:`dim_frames` for its axis, then the values of :property:`_exmpl_energy` and of :property:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` at index *i* pertain to the same frame.

Reviewer 6: Her, you lost me

  **REQUIRED keys:**

  - :field:`names`: List of Strings.
    A list of names of the dimensions of the underlying one or multi-dimensionsional data represented as multiple levels of lists.
    The order is such that the first name applies to the outermost list, the next name to the lists embedded in that list, etc.
    Dimension names defined by the OPTIMADE standard are prefixed by ``dim_``.
    Dimension names defined by database or definition providers MUST be prefixed by the corresponding database or namespace prefix, and SHOULD also be prefixed by ``dim_``, e.g., ``_exmpl_dim_particles``.
    If, within one entry, two or more array axes in one or more properties share the same dimension :field:`name`, those represent the same dimension.
    For example, let us consider the property :property:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` of the trajectory entry, where the first dimension name is :val:`dim_frames`.

>     If there is another one-dimensional (i.e., with a single axis) array property :property:`_exmpl_energy` of the same trajectory entry that specifies in its property definition the same dimension name :val:`dim_frames` for its axis, then the values of :property:`_exmpl_energy` and of :property:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` at index *i* pertain to the same frame.

Reviewer: @ndaelman-hu is this more clear?:
```suggestion
    Let the trajectory entry in this example have another, one-dimensional, array property :property:`_exmpl_energy`, which in its property definition specifies *the same name*, :val:`dim_frames`, as the name of the axis corresponding to its single dimension.
    The joint dimension name means the values of :property:`_exmpl_energy` and of :property:`frame_cartesian_site_positions` at index *i* pertain to the same frame.
    If slicing is used to request only parts of the data along the :val:`dim_frames` dimension, that is a request to slice both the properties according to the specified slice.
```

  - :field:`names`: List of Strings.
    A list of names of the dimensions of the underlying one or multi-dimensional data represented as multiple levels of lists.
    The order is such that the first name applies to the outermost list, the next name to the lists embedded in that list, etc.
    Dimension names defined by the OPTIMADE standard are prefixed by ``dim_``.
    Dimension names defined by database or definition providers MUST be prefixed by the corresponding database or namespace prefix, which SHOULD then be immediately followed by ``dim_``, e.g., ``_exmpl_dim_particles``.

>     If, within one entry, two or more array axes in one or more properties share the same dimension :field:`name`, those represent the same dimension.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    If, within one entry, two or more list axes in one or more properties share the same dimension :field:`name`, those represent the same dimension.
```
